CUMULUS-2293: RDS Data migration & upgrade docs (#2195)
nasa/cumulus: docs/upgrade-notes/data-migrations-rds.md

Cumulus deployments require an Aurora [PostgreSQL 10.2](https://www.postgresql.org/) compatible database to be provided in addition to the existing DynamoDB/ElasticSearch backend with the eventual goal of utilizing the PostgreSQL database as the primary data store for Cumulus.

> **NOTE**: Users are *strongly* encouraged to plan for and implement a database solution that scales to their use requirements, meets their security posture and maintenance needs and/or allows for multi-tenant cluster usage.

Refer to the docs on [how to deploy a new RDS cluster](./../deployment/postgres-database-deployment.md).

### 2. Deploy your data-persistence module

The following new variables have been added:

- `vpc_id`
- `permissions_boundary_arn`
- `rds_user_access_secret_arn`
- `rds_security_group_id`

You will need to update your data-persistence module to include these new variables related to RDS. See the configuration in our template-deploy repo for reference: <https://github.com/nasa/cumulus-template-deploy/tree/master/data-persistence-tf>

Then you can re-deploy your data-persistence module as usual:

```bash
terraform apply
```

### 3. Deploy and run data-migration1

> Navigate to the directory `data-migration1-tf` and copy the following `.example` files:

Author: We need to tell them to create this directory first, following the example of the template-deploy erpo

Reviewer: [`cd8beaf` (#2195)](https://github.com/nasa/cumulus/pull/2195/commits/cd8beaf54511f6945fed65a51f35bf24fc8a69fc)

```shell
cp terraform.tf.example terraform.tf
cp terraform.tfvars.example terraform.tfvars
```

In `terraform.tf`, configure your remote state settings by replacing the appropriate value for `PREFIX`.

In `terraform.tfvars` replace the appropriate values for the following variables:

> - `PREFIX`

Author: This is a bit confusing. `PREFIX` is the arbitrary example value we have set in the example vars, but `prefix` is the name of the variable. And the rest of the items in this list are variable names. So let's change this to `prefix`

```suggestion
- `prefix`
```

Reviewer: [`cd8beaf` (#2195)](https://github.com/nasa/cumulus/pull/2195/commits/cd8beaf54511f6945fed65a51f35bf24fc8a69fc)

---
id: data_migrations_rds
title: Running data migrations for RDS
hide_title: false
---

## Background

> This release of Cumulus (x.x.x) integrates with RDS and creates a new PostgreSQL database for archiving Cumulus data (e.g. granules, files, executions).

Reviewer 2: I'm pretty sure we're 100% on it being v10.0.0

Author: Are we? because the CHANGELOG in master doesn't show any breaking changes after v8.0.0:

https://github.com/nasa/cumulus/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md

So why would the pre-RDS release be 9.0.0?

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I thought that at least one of the outstanding PRs to go in had a breaking change.    I may be mistaken.   In either case, flagging for update.

> This release of Cumulus (x.x.x) integrates with RDS and creates a new PostgreSQL database for archiving Cumulus data (e.g. granules, files, executions).

Reviewer 3: Flagging as something we will need to update.

> While eventually Cumulus will only support using RDS as its data archive, for now the system will perform **parallel writes** to both DynamoDB and PostgreSQL so that all new data is archived in both datastores.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While eventually Cumulus will only support using a PostgreSQL-compatible database as its data archive, for now the system will perform **parallel writes** to both DynamoDB and PostgreSQL so that all new data is archived in both datastores.
```

However, in order to copy all of your previously written data from DynamoDB to PostgreSQL, you will need to run data migration scripts that we have provided and which this document will explain how to use.

## Upgrade steps

Follow the steps outlined below in precisely this order to upgrade your deployment and run the data migrations.

> ### Deploy a new RDS cluster

Reviewer 2: I think we need to bring in a bit of the commentary from that document, e.g. this sort of thing: 

```
Cumulus deployments require an Aurora [PostgreSQL 10.2](https://www.postgresql.org/) compatible database to be provided in addition to the existing DynamoDB/ElasticSearch backend with the eventual goal of utilizing the PostgreSQL database as the primary data store for Cumulus.

Users are *strongly* encouraged to plan for and implement a database solution that scales to their use requirements, meets their security posture and maintenance needs and/or allows for multi-tenant cluster usage.
```

Presenting the default without caveats might not serve us well in this document.

See the docs on [how to deploy a new RDS cluster](./../deployment/postgres-database-deployment.md).

### Deploy your data-persistence module

> You will need to update your data-persistence module to include some new variables related to RDS. See the configuration in our template-deploy repo for reference: <https://github.com/nasa/cumulus-template-deploy/tree/master/data-persistence-tf>

Reviewer 2: This could probably also reference `### Configure and deploy the "data-persistence-tf" root module` in the deployment README.

> You will need to update your data-persistence module to include some new variables related to RDS. See the configuration in our template-deploy repo for reference: <https://github.com/nasa/cumulus-template-deploy/tree/master/data-persistence-tf>

Reviewer 3: Any chance of calling out what these variables are? I'm having a hard time figuring it out just from following the link.

Reviewer: [`6b48caa` (#2195)](https://github.com/nasa/cumulus/pull/2195/commits/6b48caa5bf856d5197d5d8392f346be81e41bce3)

Then you can re-deploy your data-persistence module as usual:

```bash
terraform apply
```

### Deploy and run data-migration1

> From the top-level, navigate to the directory `data-migration1-tf` and copy the following `.example` files:

Reviewer 2: From the top level of ... ?   Hmm.   

We added the cluster deployment template to the template repo: 
https://github.com/nasa/cumulus-template-deploy/pull/60/files

But not the data-migration1.      Adding to 'to-do's

Reviewer: Yeah, I wasn't sure how to phrase this 🤔 Definitely open to suggestions

```shell

> cd example/data-migration1-tf/

Reviewer 3: Users will not have an `example` directory, I think they have to define their own module?

Reviewer 2: See comment on L34 -  we need to create a release artifact for this and update the template

cp terraform.tf.example terraform.tf
cp terraform.tfvars.example terraform.tfvars
```

In `terraform.tf`, configure your remote state settings by replacing the appropriate value for `PREFIX`.

> In `terraform.tfvars` replace the appropriate values for the following variables:

Reviewer 2: We should clarify that these should match the values used for the Core deployment.

- `PREFIX`
- `permissions_boundary_arn`
- `lambda_subnet_ids`
- `vpc_id`
- `provider_kms_key_id`

After replacing those values, run `terraform init`.
The output should resemble the following:

```shell
Initializing modules...

Initializing the backend...

Initializing provider plugins...
- Using previously-installed hashicorp/aws v3.34.0
- terraform.io/builtin/terraform is built in to Terraform

Terraform has been successfully initialized!
```

Run  `terraform apply` to deploy `data-migration1` and type `yes` when prompted to create those resources.
On success, you will see output like:

```shell
Apply complete! Resources: 2 added, 0 changed, 0 destroyed.
```

### Deploy cumulus module

> Navigate to the cumulus module and re-deploy:

Reviewer 2: This should reference the deployment documentation section on Core deployment, something like (deploy Core per the deployment instructions [here](link!).  Once complete, proceed with migration step 2.

Reviewer 2: Or better, reference them with an explicit call-out of the changed variables in the core module.

```shell
cd cumulus-tf
terraform apply
```

The `cumulus` module will create resources including the following relevant resources for the data migration:

- `${PREFIX}-data-migration2` lambda
- `${PREFIX}-postgres-migration-async-operation` lambda

### Run data-migration2

> Instructions on how to run your `data-migration2` lambda can be found in the `data-migration2` [README](../../lambdas/data-migration2/README.md).

Author: I'm a little concerned about punting people over to this README. I think it's a less fluid documentation experience than just documenting it here

Also, that README is wrong/out of date in referencing an ECS service:

https://github.com/nasa/cumulus/blame/feature-rds/lambdas/data-migration2/README.md#L8

I would prefer just documenting how to run that migration Lambda here. We're also going to need to document all the options that I added to support parallel scanning, which I'm happy to contribute once the rest of this PR is setup

> ### Run reconciliation tool

Reviewer 2: I'm a little concerned by the terminology here re: 'reconciliation' as it doesn't really validate record-per-record.     🤔

Reviewer: I could remove that word entirely and just reference it as the `Postgres Migration Count Tool`?

Reviewer 3: Perhaps `validation` is a better word?

Reviewer: I ended up using `validation`. Thanks for the suggestion!

> We have provided a reconciliation tool which provides a report regarding your data migration. For more information and instructions on how to run the reconciliation tool, refer to the `[Postgres Migration Count Tool README](../../lambdas/postgres-migration-count-tool/README.md)

Author: Even if we wanted to link to the Lambda readme this way, I don't think this link would render correctly in the actual docs. Have you tried viewing these docs using `npm run docs-serve` from the repo root?

Reviewer: Should be fixed now
